---
title: "Telling the Gospel Story with Philip (Acts 8)"
description: We face discouragements in life and ministry, but God is accomplishing something larger than we can imagine.
author: James Steinbach
date: 2023-07-02
layout: index
tags: misc
permalink: /philip-mission-acts-8/
---

Our time with Philip today is divided into two distinct events. In the first half of the chapter, we find Philip proclaiming the gospel publicly in Samaria; in the second half, we find Philip proclaiming the same message in an individual conversation with a court official from Ethopia. As we look at both moments in Philip's ministry, we'll see a few things. First, regardless of the method or format of communication, Philip's message is the same: the Good News about Jesus. We'll slow down and take a look at what the Gospel message was, since it's the same message we re-orient everything around and that we share today. Second, we'll draw some observations about how we can share that message. When we pull out fancy words like "evangelism," "proselytization," "apologetics," or even "soul-winning" for those of us with Baptist experiences, we get nervous. By seeing how Philip tells the gospel story, we'll hopefully remove some of the fears, obstacles, and mental hurdles that impede our gospel efforts.

## Telling the Gospel Story Publicly

First, we see Philip travel to Samaria, where he preaches the Gospel. Sometimes we get distracted by the sensational story of Simon Magus and forget what a huge deal "preaching in Samaria" was for Philip. As we typically note when reading about the Good Samaritan parable or the woman at the well, Samaritans were not remotely well-regarded by Jewish people. At this point, the growing church was still very much a Jewish sect. Jesus was the long-awaited Jewish Messiah; he fulfilled Jewish Scriptures, and he commissioned a dozen Jewish men to share his message. The Samaritans were steeply looked down on, however; there had been a centuries-long rift between Jews and Samaritans. And somehow, in Scripture, we find them responding broadly to Jesus' message. In John 4, the woman at the well brings most of her village to meet and believe in Jesus; here in Acts 8, there's widespread acceptance at Philip's preaching. Perhaps the tension between Jesus (and his church) and the Jewish religious leadership gave rise to a bit of "the enemy of my enemy is my friend" among Samaritan audiences. Regardless, the people readily believe and are baptized. But what exactly is it that they believed?

### The Authoritiatve Story of Jesus the King

Luke repeatedly describes Philip's ministry with the word "proclaim" (4, 5, 12). This word is translated "preach" in other English Bible translations, but I like that we have "proclaim" here. It helps us avoid the mistake of apply an overly-precise modern definition of the word "preach" onto Luke's narrative. If you want to become a "preacher" in a church today, you'll probably study hermeneutics (understanding Scripture) and homiletics (writing and delivering sermons) in a seminary program (or at least read a bunch of good books on those topics). In fact, I just checked a major Christian book retailer and found over 400 results when I searched for books on homiletics. That's a lot of precision and nuance and formality (mostly through a Western knowledge-transfer lens) and frankly that formal, academic understanding of "preaching" distracts us more from Philip's ministry than it clarifies what's happening throughout Acts. In fact, the word "proclaim" comes from the Greek word for "herald." An ancient herald didn't "study and prepare a message;" on the contrary, a herald repeated the message from the king whereever the king wanted. Sure, if people had a question about the precise wording of a herald's proclamation, the herald would likely answer to the best of their ability. But by and large, the herald was just a mouthpiece for the authoritative message of the king (or emperor, or tetrarch, or governor, etc). That's the first thing to notice about Philip's ministry.

Second, Luke says Philip procaimed "the word" (4). We should distinguish this from "the Bible." Though we often call the Bible "the Word of God" and affirm it weekly as "the Word of the Lord," this word Luke uses is much broader. Simply put, it means "message."

As Luke continues, he fills in more details. In verse 5, the "message" is about the Messiah, the anointed one, the Christ: this means Philip's proclamation is about the completion of Israels's story. We accidentally treat the message about Jesus as if it's just a New Testament thing that's somehow different from or perhaps even a replacement for the spiritual life and experience of God's people in Israel through the Hebrew Bible. The message of Philip (and of the apostles throughout Acts) is that Jesus is the grand finale of Israel's story, not the start of something new. Luke doubles down on the connection to Israel's story in v12: "Philip ... was proclaiming the good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Messiah."

The narrative of Israel has filled hundreds of years of stories and scrolls. Without it, Jesus would make very little sense. Even the title "Christ" (Messiah) would be meaningless without Israel's story. From the beginning, God meant for image bearers to inhabit and govern the world. In the ancient near east, when a king celebrated a victory, he set up images of himself to remind everyone who he was. In the same way, God creates a brand new kingdom and puts humanity in it to be God's image. We know the story, though, and the perfections of Eden soon give way to the broken, painful, violent, sin-poisoned rest of the world's history: the situation we still find ourselves in today. Along the way, however, God has always been present. Not content to let go of the very good creation (especially humanity, sculpted in the king's image), God works with and through humans whose faith produces righteousness. Patriarchs, prophets, deliverers, elders, judges, eventually even human kings: many fail, some walk in faith, but God's plan to redeem all of creation steadily advances, generation by generation. Sadly, we reach the end of the Old Testament story and find ourselves dissatisfied. We didn't get a happy ending. I mean, it was great when God's people got to move back to Jerusalem and rebuild it, but the testimony of the Chronicler and the later prophets reveals that not even the long-awaited return from exile brings the story to its conclusion. The people of God failed to live up to their calling to be God's royal images on earth. So we turn the last page of the Hebrew Bible, the air electric with anticipation, on the edge of our seats, waiting to find out if any human can actually be the kingly representative God designed us to be.

Philip knows the answer to that question now. Like nearly all the apostolic preaching in Acts, Philip proclaims that Jesus is that king. His message is a herald's repetition of a royal proclamation and it concerns the good news that Jesus the Messiah has finally come and he is the perfect human fulfillment of the royal image of God.

Oh, and that reminds me, even the word "gospel" or "good news" is part of this "royal" story. This observation takes us closer to Rome than Jerusalem though. The world "evangel" was used in the first century to describe the "good news" that a caesar had come into power. A Greek inscription describes Caesar Augustus with the words, "But the birthday of the god was for the world the beginning of _tidings of joy_ (gospel)." Though he ended badly, even the proclamation of Caligula's reign was hailed as gospel: "When Gaius assumed the imperial power, ... from our city ... the _good tidings_ sped to the others."


### The Good News

I want to slow down for a moment on the phrase that describes that baptism: "both men and women." The church is breaking down traditional norms about gender. For Luke to note there that women are included right alongside men would've caught the attention of his readers. There's a growing consensus that Paul's equality ideal in Gal 3 was part of an early baptismal liturgy:

> As many of you as were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. There is no longer Jew or Greek; there is no longer slave or free; there is no longer male and female, for all of you are one in Christ Jesus. (Gal 3.27–28)

This threefold denial of inequality (ethnic, economic, gender) flows from the same stream where we find Philip's baptisms in Samaria.

Let's pause here and note a major takeaway for us: sharing the gospel is not a matter of hierarchies, exclusions, or superiority. First, consider Philip. He's not an apostle, but he's out there doing some very apostolic-looking ministry. We don't need to be ordained to tell others the Good News about Jesus. Sure, we read in Acts and 1 Corinthians about special Spirit-gifting for and occasionally a vocational minisity of evangelism, but talking about the Gospel does not require ordination, a unique charism, or a specific role / position in the church. We're all allowed to tell the Gospel story! Not on is the Gospel for all of us to share, it's for all the world to hear. Regardless of gender, orientation, identity, political affiliation, religious commitment, ethnicity, socio-economic status, or any of the other markers that divide us, the Good News about Jesus is good news for all.
