---
title: "Are You Willing to Be Found by God?"
description: False narratives and lying soundtracks make us unwilling to be found by God. We can re-train our brains to tell us God's story instead.
author: James Steinbach
date: 2023-10-08
layout: index
tags: misc
permalink: /willing-to-be-found/
eleventyExcludeFromCollections: true
---

## Introduction

Hi friends, I'm James Steinbach, my family and I have been at Advent for 3 years. I'm both honored and, honestly, a bit nervous to be preaching this sermon today. Today, I'm stepping outside of my comfort zone and sharing a message that's a lot less explanation, and a lot more testimony and confession. I'm not doing that because I'm super awesome and my life is totally worthy of your attention; rather, my hope and prayer is that if I speak from transparency and vulnerability, you'll be encouraged by learning how even people who preach are still growing and learning, and that we can bring more vulnerability into all our life here.

Let's begin today by reviewing the story being told in Backyard Pilgrim. In Week 1, Backyard Pilgrim showed us God as the perfect parent, lovingly preparing for the arrival of beloved children by making the most wonderful world to meet their needs and delight their hearts. Week 2 showed us ourselves as we were designed to be, reflecting God's perfections in both our community and diversity. Week 3 is where the plot thickens; we read about the many ways we get ourselves lost. There are all kinds of paths away from God and from one another and Adam & Eve walked several of them. When we last left them, they were feeling the shame of their sin, hiding behind bushes and leaves, feeling the pain of the broken version of humanity that they had become. That brings us to the story's big decision point. It all hinges on this: God is looking for Adam & Eve, but are they willing to be found?

That's the question I want to pose to us today: "Are we willing to be found by God?" To keep that from being abstract and nebulous, I'd like to suggest you think back over last week and recall a moment where you'd gotten yourself lost, when you sinned. As we consider being willing to be found by God, connect "being found" to a specific way you got yourself lost this week.

When I realize I've gotten lost, I'm not immediately willing to be found by God. If I could slow down and logically parse everything, I could definitely rehearse some theologically precise, biblically supported, well-reasoned explanation for why I _should_ be instantly willing to be found, but truth be told, that's not how life works. That's not how our brains work. In his book _Thinking Fast and Slow_, psychologist Daniel Kahneman explains that we humans have two distinct modes of thought: "System 1" thinking is fast, intuitive, and nearly unconscious, while "System 2" thinking is slower, logical, and deliberate. Jim Wilder applied this framework to spiritual formation and Christian discipleship in his excellent book _The Other Half of Church_, aptly identifying the frustration that we often face when we try to change our lives by simply boosting our brains with more theological facts, what we might call "sanctification by logic." The problem with such attempts at spiritual formation, however, is that our rational, deliberate "System 2" thinking is slow. Our snappy, instinctive, emotional "System 1" thinking has usually gotten us into trouble before we had a chance to let all our "System 2" theo-logic kick in. As neuroscience tells us, the neurons that fire together wire together. Our "System 1" fast, intuitive reactions are the result of habits and narratives we've internalized for years. As we approach the spiritual work of "renewing our minds," it's not enough merely to add information to bulk up our "System 2" rational brains. We need to identify where we've got well-worn neural pathways that get in the way of our Christian formation so that we can rewire those patterns. Neuroplasticity is grace from God.

That was a bit dense and academic; let's simplify by talking about stories and soundtracks. By default, we humans organize our lives into stories. As things happen, we recognize patterns (or sometimes manufacture them), and then we create internal narratives that automatically come to mind in similar situations. These narratives are a bit like soundtracks. We don't focus on them; they automatically play under the cinematic lives we live, shaping how we experience new events. To understand the power of a soundtrack, recall the moment in Jurassic Park where Dr. Grant and the Hammond kids see the field of dinosaurs for the first time. Now swap out the majestic horns of the main theme for the raucously chaotic sounds of the Keystone Kops or the Benny Hill theme and you've got a whole different story. Or replace the tender strings and mournful pennywhistle of _My Heart Will Go On_ with the deep rhythmic thrumming notes of Jaws and the ending of Titanic will hit you in a completely different way. Our internal stories play automatically like soundtracks in our hearts and minds, shaping how we interpret and experience lfe, but we're rarely conscious of that effect.

When I realize I've gotten lost and I have to decide if I'm willing to be found by God, there are some harmful soundtracks that play in my head. I'm still actively working to replace them (to rewire those well-worn neural pathways) with God's true story instead. For the rest of our time, I'd like to share with you three harmful soundtracks that play in my heart in moments when I need to be found, as well as some of the biblical soundtracks I'm using to replace them. This will not be a comprehensive overview of every wrong internal story we might struggle with. My false narratives will resonate strongly with some of you and I hope that God's good replacement stories resonate equally well. If your inner narratives are different, I pray that you'll be able to get a sense of a method for relearning the right story and that the Spirit will guide you to specific parts of Scripture, liturgy, and community life that you need for your replacements.

## Bad Soundtracks

### After I sin, God & I can probably use some space.

The first lying inner soundtrack that hinders me from being willing to be found is this: "after I sin, God & I can probably use some space." You may have experience with an authority figure who would walk away when you'd done something wrong, responding to the relational rift with distance instead of connection, with space instead of security (whether that distance was harsh or punitive, or actually a necessary way for that person to maintain their calm), you may have adopted that as a way of interacting with God. When I need to be found, the soundtrack of "slow down, give it some space" plays and it misshapes my perspective, prompting self-imposed isolation instead of secure connection with God.

I'm working to rewire those neurons with the story of the Fall in Genesis 3. Notice that in verses 8-9, God goes looking for Adam and Eve:

> They heard the sound of the Lord God walking in the garden at the time of the evening breeze, and the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God among the trees of the garden. But the Lord God called to the man and said to him, “Where are you?”

God already knows that Adam and Eve have sinned. In spite of that, God heads to the garden for their standing appointment for an evening walk. God is looking for the kind of fellowship they always had before they sinned. Not content to shrug and keep walking when Adam and Eve are missing, God explicitly calls out, "Where are you?" Is this a God who needs space after we sin? Does this God need to walk away and cool down before we can talk about it? Is this God who "just can't even" with our lostness? Hardly!

Seeing the way God intentionally seeks out Adam and Eve in their shame and sin reveals that my soundtrack is wrong. It's nothing but self-imposed isolation and I'm actually cutting myself off from the loving, healing, restoring presence of God. When that old broken story repeats itself, I need this Scripture to remind me that God wants restoration so that we can have the same unhindered fellowship we had before I got lost. **Sin or not, God deeply desires to spend time with me.**

### Because of my sin, I’m not worthy of God’s attention / love.

A second false narrative that plays in my head when I've gotten lost is "Because of my sin, I’m not worthy of God’s love." Logically, I know full well that there's no merit whatsoever in any idea that undermines the foundational truth of God's love for me. Such ideas are frankly satanic. Alas, my reasoned conclusion on such matters loses the race in my brain to the instinctively-played bad soundtrack. I spent many years in a Christian sub-culture that strongly emphasized external compliance with strict moral standards. I treated good behavior as a proxy for my relationship with God. When I felt like I was doing right, I believed God was pleased with me; when I was aware of my sins, I concluded God wasn't. For years, those neural pathways fired together and that soundtrack reached the top of my spiritual Spotify Wrapped. And so, I'm standing here now as a middle-aged Christian who's spent his whole life in church and has seminary degrees, confessing that I'm still learning out how to relate to God securely, still unlearning the fear that my behavior determines how much God loves me.

Tim Keller's book, _The Prodigal God_ set this soundtrack replacement in motion for me. His explanation of how Jesus reveals God's extravagant love in Luke 15 opened my eyes and I steadily return to this parable, repeating in my heart, retelling it in my own words, putting myself in the story, rewiring my brain with this glorious truth. I know this is a story most of you know very well, but may I retell this story in my own words?

There's a man who has two sons, but he's having trouble with the younger one. In a moment of greed, rebellion, or thoughtlessness, the younger son says, "Dad, let's pretend you're dead and I get my portion of the inheritance now." Heartbroken, the father calculates his wealth, liquidates some assets, and hands his son a purse full of coins. He climbs up to the roof of his house, puts his hands on the guardrail, and weeps as he watches his son run away from the family home, dust flying up behind him as he chooses to be lost. For a time, the son lives the high life, spending prodigally to indulge his every passion. He's rich and invincible, until he isn't. His cash runs out as a famine strikes his new city. The only jobs left are the most shameful and dirty sorts of labor he can imagine. Then the son starts to wonder about home; he begins to realize he might just be willing to be found. So he crafts a little speech and all the way home, he practices it over and over again, fine-tuning his wording, rehearsing his tone, perfecting his apology, and making sure he can get through it without emotionally breaking down: "I've sinned against God and before you, so I'm no longer worthy to be called your son. But would you please hire me?" Back at home, evening is starting to fall. The day's work done, the father stands again on his roof, watching the road as the light and his old eyes grew dim. Like every night since his son's departure, he blinks back tears as time marches inexorably past him. As the sun dips almost entirely below the nearby mountains, his breath catches in his throat. A distant form moving in from the horizon. Forbidding himself to hope too much, the father grips the railing till his knuckles are white, eyes squinting as he peers out into the distance. _No neighbor would be coming up that road at this hour_, he thinks, _but could it be? Is it all possible?_ As the speck grows into an almost human shape, the father recognizes the way the visitor walks; more weary and worn than the last time he saw that gait, but unmistakable: it has to be his son! Scarcely able to breathe or even see through his tears, he stumbles down the stairs, nearly tripping over a goat in the common space near the kitchen. But once he's out the door, he casts dignity to the wind, pulls his robes up to his waist, and sprints, suddenly finding the grace, energy, and athleticism he had as a young man. His son sees him and stops in his tracks. He has no idea how such an old man is moving like that, but it is most certainly his father. He staggers the last few steps, collapses into his father's embrace, takes a deep breath (when the squeezing and kisses abate for a moment), and then starts the spiel he's been practicing for miles. "I've sinned against God and before you, so I'm no longer worthy to be called your son." But this is too much for his father; he interrupts his son upon hearing such a ridiculous conclusion. "No longer worthy to be my son? Absurd!" Turning to a servant (the poor woman near the point of collapse herself after trying to keep up with his wild sprint), the father's instructions bubble out with glee: "Make everything ready for a celebration! The robe, the ring, the richest food, everything! My son was dead, but now he's alive. He got himself so lost, but here he is, willing to be found."

**God sprints toward me and rejoices with me when I return.**

### I need to repent “correctly” before I can get close to God.

The final bad soundtrack I want to mention today is "I need to repent 'correctly' before I can get close to God." I need to feel bad enough about my sin. I need to get myself back on the right path and stay there long enough before I can be found by God. I wallow in a sort of "Protestant penance" for a while.

In Luke 15, the father's response to his son provides the true alternative I need to hear. It doesn't matter that his son has reached the awful conclusion that he's no longer worthy of love; his father lavishes love on him. For imperfect folks like us, there's no such thing as perfect repentance and God's not expecting perfection from us. After all, God is calling, "Where are you?" God is holding constant vigil and then sprinting down the path to embrace us. God already wants us found; God is not putting some "prove it" hurdle in front of us if we're _really_ willing to be found.

There's a moment in our Eucharist liturgy that's become a beloved part of this rewiring effort for me as well: the words of Absolution and the Comfortable Words. I've been in churches that have included a strong emphasis on sin and repentance including prayers of confession, but without these necessary words that follow confession.

> Almighty God, our heavenly Father, who in his great mercy has promised forgiveness of sins to all those who sincerely repent and with true faith turn to him, have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins, confirm and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life; through Jesus Christ our Lord.

> Come to me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Mt 11:28
> God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. John 3:16
> The saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. 1Ti 1:15
> If anyone sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 1Jn 2:1-2

In contrast to the false narrative of "proving my repentance enough," the true soundtrack I'm learning to play is that **forgiveness is God’s authoritative grace, not something I earn.**

## Conclusion

Thank you for bearing with me if this sermon felt different (it certainly did to me!). I have one last parting detail to add in conclusion. This work of replacing soundtracks, of rewriting stories, of rewiring neural pathways - it's not work for individuals to do alone. We're on a pilgrimage together, not a bunch of individual "hero's journeys." Talk with one another and help each other identify harmful soundtracks. Keep talking and work together to find Scriptural stories and community practices that will retrain your hearts and minds with new defaults. Let's be a community of support for this long, patient relearning. And as we learn the habit of replacing our inner narratives, I think we'll become a people who are more consistently willing to be found by God.
